New post: Dask-ML and Ray tune-sklearn comparison (#66)
dask/dask-blog: _posts/2020-07-12-ray-tune.md

---
layout: post
title: Dask-ML offers modern hyperparameter optimization techniques packaged in a Scikit-learn API
tagline: This has been implemented in Dask-ML for over a year
author: <a href="https://stsievert.com">Scott Sievert</a> (University of Wisconsin–Madison)
tags: [machine-learning, dask-ml, dask, ray]
theme: twitter
---

{% include JB/setup %}

Hyperparameter optimization is the process of deducing machine learning model
parameters that can't learned from data. These "hyperparameters" have to be
given at model initialization. An example is with the `alpha` parameter in
Scikit-learn's [Ridge]. For a more complete overview, see "[How to Use t-SNE
Effectively][tsne]" or "[Tuning the hyper-parameters of an estimator][tuning]."

[The introduction][1] of Ray's Scikit-learn compatible hyperparameter

> optimization library made an counterfactual statement:

Reviewer: typo: "an"

And is "counterfactual" the right word here?

Author: No, counterfactual is not the right word. I used "exaggerated" instead. Other choices include "inflated," "misleading" and "disorted".

[tsne]:https://distill.pub/2016/misread-tsne/
[tuning]:https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/grid_search.html

[Ridge]:https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.linear_model.Ridge.html#sklearn.linear_model.Ridge
[1]:https://medium.com/distributed-computing-with-ray/gridsearchcv-2-0-new-and-improved-ee56644cbabf

> Cutting edge hyperparameter tuning techniques (bayesian optimization, *early
> stopping, distributed execution*) can provide significant speedups over grid
> search and random search.
>
> However, the machine learning ecosystem is missing a solution that provides
> users with the ability to leverage these new algorithms while allowing users
> to stay within the Scikit-Learn API. In this blog post, we introduce
> tune-sklearn to bridge this gap. Tune-sklearn is a drop-in replacement for
> Scikit-Learn’s model selection module with state-of-the-art optimization
> features. [emphasis added]
>
> —[GridSearchCV 2.0 — New and Improved][1]

> This is a blatantly misleading: Dask-ML fills the same gap they claim to bridge.

Reviewer: Agreed that we'll want to moderate the tone here and elsewhere :)

Author: :+1:

a table comparing different libraries and their support in Dask-ML and Ray:

| Library | Dask-ML support | Ray support | Dask-ML: early stopping? | Ray: early stopping? |
|:-----:|:-----:|:-----:|:-----:|:-----:|
| Scikit-learn | ✔ | ✔ | ✔, with `partial_fit` |✔, with `partial_fit` |
| PyTorch via Skorch | ✔ | ✔ | ✔ |✔ |
| Keras | ✔ |✔ | ❌|❌ |
| LightGDM | ✔ | ✔ | ❌ |❌ |
| XGBoost |✔ | ✔ | ❌ |❌ |

Of course, Dask has further integration with LightGDM and XGBoost through
[dask_ml.xgboost][dmlxg] and [dask-lightgdm][dml-lg].

[^ray-pf]:From [Ray's README.md]: "If the estimator does not support `partial_fit`, a warning will be shown saying early stopping cannot be done and it will simply run the cross-validation on Ray's parallel back-end."

[dml-lg]:https://github.com/dask/dask-lightgbm
[dmlxg]:https://ml.dask.org/xgboost.html
[Ray's README.md]:https://github.com/ray-project/tune-sklearn/blob/31f228e21ef632a89a74947252d8ad5323cbd043/README.md

> 4\. **Scale up**: Tune-sklearn leverages Ray Tune, a library for distributed
> hyperparameter tuning, to efficiently and transparently parallelize cross
> validation on multiple cores and even multiple machines.

> Naturally, this is true for Dask-ML too, especially with Dask's wide support of

Reviewer: Clarify "this" here (that it means "scales to multiple cores, machines") rather than "leverages Ray Tune")

---
layout: post
title: Dask-ML and Ray have the same features for model selection
tagline: Modern hyperparameter optimizations, Scikit-learn support, framework support and scaling to many machines.
author: <a href="https://stsievert.com">Scott Sievert</a> (University of Wisconsin–Madison)
tags: [machine-learning, dask-ml, dask, ray]
theme: twitter
---

{% include JB/setup %}

Hyperparameter optimization is the process of deducing machine learning model

> parameters that can't learned from data. These "hyperparameters" have to be

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
parameters that can't be learned from data. These "hyperparameters" have to be
```

given at model initialization. An example is with the `alpha` parameter in
Scikit-learn's [Ridge]. For a more complete overview, see "[How to Use t-SNE
Effectively][tsne]" or "[Tuning the hyper-parameters of an estimator][tuning]."

There's a host of libraries and frameworks out there to address this problem,
including a popular implementation [in Scikit-learn][skl-ms]. This interface
has been mirrored [in Dask-ML][dml-ms] and [auto-sklearn], both of which offer
advanced hyperparameter optimization features.  Dask-ML's implementation is
illustrated in "[Better and faster hyperparameter optimization with
Dask][db-bf]."

[auto-sklearn]:https://automl.github.io/auto-sklearn/master/

> [Ray] recently provided a Scikit-learn interface to [Ray Tune].  [The
> introduction][1] of this library, tune-sklearn, exaggerates it's novelty:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Ray] recently provided a Scikit-learn interface to [Ray Tune].  [The
introduction][1] of this library stated:
```

[Ray]:https://docs.ray.io
[Ray Tune]:https://docs.ray.io/en/master/tune.html

[dml-ms]:https://ml.dask.org/hyper-parameter-search.html
[skl-ms]:https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/grid_search.html
[tsne]:https://distill.pub/2016/misread-tsne/
[tuning]:https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/grid_search.html

[Ridge]:https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.linear_model.Ridge.html#sklearn.linear_model.Ridge
[1]:https://medium.com/distributed-computing-with-ray/gridsearchcv-2-0-new-and-improved-ee56644cbabf

> Cutting edge hyperparameter tuning techniques (bayesian optimization, early
> stopping, distributed execution) can provide significant speedups over grid
> search and random search.
>
> However, the machine learning ecosystem is missing a solution that provides
> users with the ability to leverage these new algorithms while allowing users
> to stay within the Scikit-Learn API. In this blog post, we introduce
> tune-sklearn to bridge this gap. Tune-sklearn is a drop-in replacement for
> Scikit-Learn’s model selection module with state-of-the-art optimization
> features.
>
> —[GridSearchCV 2.0 — New and Improved][1]

> This exaggerates Ray's novelty because Dask-ML and auto-sklearn also provide
> "users with the ability to leverage these new algorithms while allowing users
> to stay within the Scikit-Learn API." Ray is not the first project to "bridge
> this gap."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We wanted to clear up some misconceptions here. Specifically, Dask-ML has
provided access to "cutting edge" hyperparameter tuning techniques with a
Scikit-Learn-compatible API for a while now. This post will give some examples
using Dask-ML and some comparisons with tune-sklearn.
```

Author: Thanks! That's the right wording.

> That is, Dask-ML offers the same features that Ray's tune-sklearn offers:

Reviewer: I think can be removed if my suggestion is accepted.

Reviewer: Or perhaps, something like "Let's step through each of the 4 bullets in the tune-sklearn introduction"

(edit: I see you have something like that below, with "Let's look at each feature..."

[dml-hod]:https://ml.dask.org/hyper-parameter-search.html

> Here’s what tune-sklearn has to offer:
> 1. **Consistency with Scikit-Learn API** ...
> 2. **Modern hyperparameter tuning techniques** ...
> 3. **Framework support** ...
> 4. **Scale up** ...
>
> Tune-sklearn is also **fast**.

> Dask-ML has had these features since June 2019, about a year earlier than Ray.

Reviewer: I think strike this. Who got there first doesn't seem super important to me :)

Author: I've remove "June 2019" but have kept "about a year."

``` python
from dask_ml.model_selection import HyperbandSearchCV
from scipy.stats import loguniform
from sklearn.datasets import make_classification
from sklearn.linear_model import SGDClassifier

X, y = make_classification()
model = SGDClassifier()
params = {"loss": ["hinge", "log", "modified_huber", "squared_hinge", "perceptron"],
          "alpha": loguniform(1e-5, 1e-3)}

search = HyperbandSearchCV(model, params)
search.fit(X, y, classes=[0, 1])
```

This example is almost identical to [one of Ray's examples][sgd-eg] and [one of
Scikit-learn's examples][skl-eg]. Clearly, Dask-ML offers a Scikit-learn
compatible model selection API.

[skl-eg]:https://scikit-learn.org/stable/auto_examples/model_selection/plot_randomized_search.html#sphx-glr-auto-examples-model-selection-plot-randomized-search-py
[sgd-eg]:https://github.com/ray-project/tune-sklearn/blob/31f228e21ef632a89a74947252d8ad5323cbd043/examples/sgd.py

> 2\. **Modern hyperparameter tuning techniques:** tune-sklearn is the only
> Scikit-Learn interface that allows you to easily leverage Bayesian
> Optimization, HyperBand, and other optimization techniques by simply toggling
> a few parameters.

> Dask-ML also offers modern hyperparameter tuning techniques. Hyperband is the

Reviewer: Injecting a personal option: whether "modern = good" is subjective :) Sticking to objective truths, we can say that Dask-ML implements Hyperband and (currently) lacks a Bayesian Optimization method.

I'd also note that that we've built a pretty flexible framework for building *custom* asynchronous training strategies.

Author: Thanks! That suggestion has generated an intuitive explanation of how Hyperband behaves.

Author: > pretty flexible framework for building custom asynchronous training strategies.

Thanks! That's a good point.

most prominent example; after the introduction in 2016, [the paper by Li et.
al][hyperband-paper] has been cited [over 470 times][470] and has been
implemented in many different libraries including [Dask-ML][hscv],
[keras-tune], [Optuna], AutoML[^automl] and [Microsoft's NNI][nni].

Hyperband is so popular because it's so effective. In the introduction paper by
Li et.  al, they showed a rather drastic improvement when comparing with all
the relevant implementations,[^hyperband-figs] and this drastic improvement has
remained in follow-up works.[^follow-up]

[^follow-up]:See Figure 1 of [the BOHB paper][BOHB paper] and [a paper][blippar] from an augmented reality company.

[^hyperband-figs]:See Figures 4, 7 and 8 in "[Hyperband: A Novel Bandit-Based Approach toHyperparameter Optimization][hyperband-paper]."

[blippar]:https://arxiv.org/pdf/1801.01596.pdf
[BOHB paper]:http://proceedings.mlr.press/v80/falkner18a/falkner18a.pdf
[nni]:https://nni.readthedocs.io/en/latest/Tuner/HyperbandAdvisor.html

Even Bayesian hyperparameter optimization have been adapted to the Hyperband
implementation in AutoML's [BOHB]. Dask-ML could use more Bayesian sampling

> approaches; however, this is difficult given the distributed nature of Dask and

Reviewer: Is there anything specific to Dask's architecture that makes Bayesian methods hard? Or is a generally hard thing for distributed systems to do. If it's general, then replace "Dask" with something like "any distributed system".

Author: Thanks!

the serial nature of Bayesian sampling algorithms. Bayesian sampling treats
models as black boxes, and tries to deduce the set of inputs that maximize the
black box's quality. If there were an infinite number of workers, the Bayesian
sampling algorithm wouldn't have time to deduce anything before initializing
models. Regardless, [BOHB] has an intelligent way of scaling to distributed
systems.[^scaling]

[^scaling]:As mentioned in Section 4.2 and illustrated in Figure 2 of [the BOHB paper][BOHB paper].

The additional features of Dask-ML's hyperparameter optimization are also
modern, especially in the context of natural language processing (NLP).
[Avoiding repeated work] in Scikit-learn Pipelines is a huge feature when
performing NLP because the initial stages of analysis take an excessive amount
of computation and memory.[^openai] It's future work to combine this with Dask-ML's

> `HyperbandSearchCV`.

Reviewer: Is this future work the need for a `Pipeline.partial_fit`? If so, perhaps link to that issue / PR (showing that we're not just taking the scikit-learn API as gospel, but are working with the community to improve it).

Author: I added a note about how we added `partial_fit` for Keras. Requiring `Pipeline.partial_fit` needs more thought; see https://github.com/scikit-learn/scikit-learn/issues/3299 for more discussion.

---
layout: post
title: Dask-ML and Ray have the same features for model selection
tagline: Modern hyperparameter optimizations, Scikit-learn support, framework support and scaling to many machines.
author: <a href="https://stsievert.com">Scott Sievert</a> (University of Wisconsin–Madison)
tags: [machine-learning, dask-ml, dask, ray]
theme: twitter
---

> *This post also lives at http://stsievert.com/2020/03/ (with better styling)*

Reviewer 3: I assume you are planning on fixing this link once the editing is done?

Author: Yup, correct. I've added a TODO placeholder.

---

*This post also lives at http://stsievert.com/TODO (with better styling)*

{% include JB/setup %}

Hyperparameter optimization is the process of deducing machine learning model
parameters that can't be learned from data. These "hyperparameters" have to be
given at model initialization. An example is with the `alpha` parameter in
Scikit-learn's [Ridge]. For a more complete overview, see "[How to Use t-SNE
Effectively][tsne]" or "[Tuning the hyper-parameters of an estimator][tuning]."

Scikit-learn provides some basic implementations in their [model selection
module][skl-ms].
`RandomizedSearchCV` and `GridSearchCV`. These implementations are widely used,
especially when the data fits in memory and the model fitting happens pretty
quickly (less than minutes). However, a more advanced implementation is
required as soon as the computation takes longer or the data becomes large.

There's a host of libraries and frameworks out there to address this problem.
Scikit-learn's interface has been mirrored [in Dask-ML][dml-ms] and
[auto-sklearn], both of which offer advanced hyperparameter optimization
features. Other implementations that don't follow the Scikit-learn interface

> include include [Ray Tune], [AutoML] and [Optuna].

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
include [Ray Tune], [AutoML] and [Optuna].
```

[skl-ms]:https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/grid_search.html
[tsne]:https://distill.pub/2016/misread-tsne/
[tuning]:https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/grid_search.html

[Ridge]:https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.linear_model.Ridge.html#sklearn.linear_model.Ridge
[1]:https://medium.com/distributed-computing-with-ray/gridsearchcv-2-0-new-and-improved-ee56644cbabf

> Cutting edge hyperparameter tuning techniques (bayesian optimization, early
> stopping, distributed execution) can provide significant speedups over grid
> search and random search.
>
> However, the machine learning ecosystem is missing a solution that provides
> users with the ability to leverage these new algorithms while allowing users
> to stay within the Scikit-Learn API. In this blog post, we introduce
> tune-sklearn [Ray's tuning library] to bridge this gap. Tune-sklearn is a
> drop-in replacement for Scikit-Learn’s model selection module with
> state-of-the-art optimization features.
>
> —[GridSearchCV 2.0 — New and Improved][1]

This claim is inaccurate: Dask-ML has provided access to "cutting edge
hyperparameter tuning techniques" with a Scikit-learn compatible API for over a

> year. To provide correct this inaccuracy, let's start by looking at the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
year. To correct this inaccuracy, let's start by looking at the
```

features of Ray's tune-sklearn:

[dml-hod]:https://ml.dask.org/hyper-parameter-search.html

> Here’s what [Ray's] tune-sklearn has to offer:
> 1. **Consistency with Scikit-Learn API** ...
> 2. **Modern hyperparameter tuning techniques** ...
> 3. **Framework support** ...
> 4. **Scale up** ...
>
> [Ray's] Tune-sklearn is also **fast**.

Dask-ML's model selection module has every one of the features. Let's look at
each feature and see what Dask-ML and Ray have to offer:

> 1\. **Consistency with Scikit-Learn API**: tune-sklearn is a drop-in
> replacement for GridSearchCV and RandomizedSearchCV, so you only need to
> change less than 5 lines in a standard Scikit-Learn script to use the API.

*Dask-ML is also consistent with the Scikit-learn API.*

Here's how to use Dask-ML's hyperparameter optimization:

``` python
from dask_ml.model_selection import HyperbandSearchCV
from dask.distributed import Client
from scipy.stats import loguniform
from sklearn.datasets import make_classification
from sklearn.linear_model import SGDClassifier

> if __name__ == "__main__":

Reviewer 3: Nitpick, but I think it's easier to read this without the `if __name__ == "__main__":` bit.

Author: Yeah, that's a good idea. It won't run without the `if __name__ == "__main__":` block but it warns otherwise.

    X, y = make_classification()
    model = SGDClassifier()
    params = {"loss": ["hinge", "log", "modified_huber", "squared_hinge", "perceptron"],
              "alpha": loguniform(1e-5, 1e-3)}

>     client = Client()

Reviewer 3: You don't need to instantiate client right?

Author: Yes, a client is required for `IncrementalSearchCV` and it's children. That's why I included the `if __name__ == "__main__"` block.

    search = HyperbandSearchCV(model, params)
    search.fit(X, y, classes=[0, 1])
```

> This example is almost identical to [one of Ray's examples][sgd-eg] and [one of

Reviewer 3: I know the formatting might be hard, but I think side by side code blocks would be the best way to demonstrate this. Maybe you could use a table?

Author: Yeah, formatting is difficult. You're saying side-by-side with Scikit-learn?

Reviewer 3: side-by-side dask-ml and ray? Or ideally both ray and sk-learn

Author: How's that? I did "top-and-bottom" for Dask-ML, Ray and Scikit-learn instead of "side-by-side":

``` python
from scipy.stats import loguniform
from sklearn.datasets import make_classification
from sklearn.linear_model import SGDClassifier
from dask.distributed import Client
client = Client()

X, y = make_classification()
model = SGDClassifier()
params = {"loss": ["hinge", "log", "modified_huber", "squared_hinge", "perceptron"],
          "alpha": loguniform(1e-5, 1e-3)}

# Scikit-learn hyperparameter optimization
from sklearn.model_selection import RandomizedSearchCV
search = RandomizedSearchCV(clf, params, ...)
search.fit(X, y)

# Dask hyperparameter optimization
from dask_ml.model_selection import HyperbandSearchCV
search = HyperbandSearchCV(model, params, ...)
search.fit(X, y, classes=[0, 1])

# Ray hyperparameter optimization
from tune_sklearn import TuneSearchCV
search = TuneSearchCV(clf, params, early_stopping=True, ...)
search.fit(X, y, classes=[0, 1])
```

[the conclusion]:#conclusion
[hyperband-paper]:https://arxiv.org/pdf/1603.06560.pdf
[470]:https://scholar.google.com/scholar?cites=10473284631669296057&as_sdt=5,39&sciodt=0,39&hl=en

[^automl]:Their implementation of Hyperband in [HpBandSter] is included in [Auto-PyTorch] and [BOAH].

[^openai]:Computing [n-grams] is difficult. For OpenAI, NLP preprocessing took 8 GPU-months! ([source][gpt])

[n-grams]:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/N-gram
[gpt]:https://openai.com/blog/language-unsupervised/#drawbacks
[Avoiding repeated work]:https://ml.dask.org/hyper-parameter-search.html#avoid-repeated-work
[BOHB]:https://automl.github.io/HpBandSter/build/html/optimizers/bohb.html
[hscv]:https://ml.dask.org/modules/generated/dask_ml.model_selection.HyperbandSearchCV.html#dask_ml.model_selection.HyperbandSearchCV
[BOAH]:https://github.com/automl/BOAH
[Auto-PyTorch]:https://www.automl.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/09/chapter7-autonet.pdf
[HpBandSter]:https://github.com/automl/HpBandSter
[Optuna]:https://medium.com/optuna/optuna-supports-hyperband-93b0cae1a137
[keras-tune]:https://keras-team.github.io/keras-tuner/documentation/tuners/#hyperband-class

> > 3\. **Framework support**: tune-sklearn is used primarily for tuning

Reviewer 3: I think each of these should get a header to break up the piece a bit.

Author: Good idea!

---
layout: post

> title: Dask-ML and Ray have the same features for model selection

Reviewer 4: This title sounds defensive, I recommend instead "Comparing Dask-ML and Ray Tune's Model Selection Algorithms"

algorithm in Ray's tune-sklearn. To be specific, I'm interested in comparing
these methods:

* Scikit-Learn's `RandomizedSearchCV`. This is a popular implementation, one
  that I've bootstrapped myself with a custom model.
* Dask-ML's `HyperbandSearchCV`. This is an early stopping technique for
  `RandomizedSearchCV`.
* Ray tune-sklearn's `TuneSearchCV`. This is a slightly different early
  stopping technique than `HyperbandSearchCV`'s.

Each of these will be configured to perform the same tasks, sample 100
parameters and train for no longer than 100 "epochs" or passes through the
data. All of these estimators will be set up as their respective documentation
suggests;[^random-search] the complete setup is in [the
appendix](#appendix).

Each search will use 8 workers with a single cross validation split. I've also
setup the model so every `partial_fit` call processes 60,000 examples in 1.2
seconds. Here's how long each library takes to complete this search:

<img src="/images/2020-model-selection/n_workers=8.png" width="450px"
 />

Clearly, Ray and Dask-ML offer similar performance for 8 workers when compared

> with Scikit-Learn. Even relatively, Dask-ML is only 15% slower than Ray with 8
> workers.  Ray might perform better with more workers because they implement an
> asynchronous variant of Dask-ML's Hyperband; however, Dask-ML can scale up to 24
> workers for the search in "[Better and faster hyperparameter optimization with
> Dask][db-bf]." That's the number of GPUs on 4 nodes of the [Summit
> supercomputer][summit]!

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
with Scikit-Learn. However to Ray's credit we do find that the Dask-ML HyperbandSearchCV
algorithm is 15% slower than Ray with 8 workers.  
We suspect that Ray Tune performs better in this case because they implement an
asynchronous variant of Dask-ML's Hyperband.
```

Unpacking this suggestion a bit I think that the phrasing "Dask is only 15% slower" sounds a bit defensive.  It sounds like we're coming from a position of an underdog.  Instead, I recommend a more gracious tone, which I've tried to produce here with "To Ray's credit ..."

I didn't understand the excitement around using four nodes of Summit.  This sounds like a small number of nodes to me.  I may not understand the scaling challenges in this space though.  

If you wanted to add more credibility on the Dask side you might say things like "We haven't yet investigated this slowdown.  It's worth noting that we didn't do any optimizing or tuning of the Dask-ML codebase when running this benchmark.  This is the code as it has been for the last year."  You might also refer to the [Biased Benchmarks](http://matthewrocklin.com/blog/work/2017/03/09/biased-benchmarks) post.

Reviewer 4: Oh, I see that there is a reference to this post just below already.

---
layout: post
title: Dask-ML and Ray have the same features for model selection
tagline: Modern hyperparameter optimizations, Scikit-learn support, framework support and scaling to many machines.
author: <a href="https://stsievert.com">Scott Sievert</a> (University of Wisconsin–Madison)
tags: [machine-learning, dask-ml, dask, ray]
theme: twitter
---

{% include JB/setup %}

> Hyperparameter optimization is the process of deducing model parameters that

Reviewer: Can this be omitted and the next paragraph be omitted and link to https://ml.dask.org/hyper-parameter-search.html instead? I think most people reading this will be familiar enough with hyperparameter optimization.

Author: Thanks, I've updated that paragraph.

"cutting edge hyperparameter tuning techniques" with a Scikit-learn compatible
API. To correct their statement, let's see how Dask-ML compares to each of the
features that tune-sklearn provides:

[dml-hod]:https://ml.dask.org/hyper-parameter-search.html

> Here’s what [Ray's] tune-sklearn has to offer:
> 1. **Consistency with Scikit-Learn API** ...
> 2. **Modern hyperparameter tuning techniques** ...
> 3. **Framework support** ...
> 4. **Scale up** ...
>
> [Ray's] Tune-sklearn is also **fast**.

Dask-ML's model selection module has every one of the features. Let's look at
each feature and see what Dask-ML and Ray have to offer:

### Consistency with the Scikit-learn API

*Dask-ML is also consistent with the Scikit-learn API.*

Here's how to use Scikit-learn's, Dask-ML's and Ray's tune-sklearn
hyperparameter optimization:

``` python
from scipy.stats import loguniform
from sklearn.datasets import make_classification
from sklearn.linear_model import SGDClassifier
from dask.distributed import Client
client = Client()

X, y = make_classification()
model = SGDClassifier()
params = {"loss": ["hinge", "log", "perceptron"],
          "alpha": loguniform(1e-5, 1e-3)}

> 

Reviewer: I wonder if this can all be omitted.

Author: Yeah, I reached the same conclusion. Now it's in the appendix (which points to stsievert/dask-hyperband-comparison after a brief example).

# Scikit-learn hyperparameter optimization
from sklearn.model_selection import RandomizedSearchCV
search = RandomizedSearchCV(clf, params, ...)
search.fit(X, y)

# Dask hyperparameter optimization
from dask_ml.model_selection import HyperbandSearchCV
search = HyperbandSearchCV(model, params, ...)
search.fit(X, y, classes=[0, 1])

# Ray hyperparameter optimization
from tune_sklearn import TuneSearchCV
search = TuneSearchCV(clf, params, ...)
search.fit(X, y, classes=[0, 1])
```

> Clearly, both Dask-ML and Ray's tune-sklearn are Scikit-learn compatible. Now

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Clearly, both Dask-ML and Ray's tune-sklearn are Scikit-Learn compatible. Now
```

let's focus on how each search performs and how it's configured.

[skl-eg]:https://scikit-learn.org/stable/auto_examples/model_selection/plot_randomized_search.html#sphx-glr-auto-examples-model-selection-plot-randomized-search-py
[sgd-eg]:https://github.com/ray-project/tune-sklearn/blob/31f228e21ef632a89a74947252d8ad5323cbd043/examples/sgd.py

### Modern hypereparameter tuning techniques

> Ray's tune-sklearn provides access to advanced hyperparameter optimization, and

Reviewer: The previous section started with the note in italics. Let's be consistent.

Author: Thanks, that removes the word "also" from each claim.

[the introduction][1] made this claim:

> tune-sklearn is the only
> Scikit-Learn interface that allows you to easily leverage Bayesian
> Optimization, HyperBand and other optimization techniques by simply toggling a few parameters.

*Dask-ML also offers state-of-the-art hyperparameter tuning techniques that
are easily accessible.*

Methods to avoid unnecessary work in hyperparameter optimization include the
following include the following:

1. Stopping poor scoring models before they complete training.
2. Using prior model training to figure out the best set of hyperparameters.

Dask-ML focuses on the first option because it's easier to parallelize.
Dask-ML has an implementation of "Hyperband," an early stopping technique for
Scikit-learn's `RandomizedSearchCV`. Hyperband and `RandomizedSearchCV` are the
same, except Hyperband makes decisions on when to stop models.[^stopping]

> Hyperband is popular because it works.  After the introduction of Hyperband in

Reviewer: Can this be omitted?

Our focus should be on correcting the inaccurate claims, not explaining details of algorithms.  This feels a bit extraneous.

[^tpe]:TPE is described in Section 4 of "[Algorithms for Hyperparameter Optimization][aho]," and is available [through Hyperopt][hyperopt].
[SMAC-paper]:https://www.cs.ubc.ca/~hutter/papers/10-TR-SMAC.pdf
[SMAC-automl]:https://www.automl.org/automated-algorithm-design/algorithm-configuration/smac/
[spearmint]:https://github.com/HIPS/Spearmint
[aho]:http://papers.nips.cc/paper/4443-algorithms-for-hyper-parameter-optimization.pdf
[pbo]:https://papers.nips.cc/paper/4522-practical-bayesian-optimization-of-machine-learning-algorithms.pdf
[HIPS/spearmint]:https://github.com/HIPS/Spearmint
[hyperopt]:http://hyperopt.github.io/hyperopt/

The second method of avoiding unnecessary work is called "Bayesian
optimization." These are more difficult in any distributed system because of
the serial nature of Bayesian sampling algorithms.  Bayesian sampling treats
models as black boxes, and tries to deduce the set of inputs that maximize the
black box's quality. This is difficult in any distributed system because if
there were an infinite number of workers, the Bayesian sampling algorithm
won't have time to deduce anything after initializing models.

> Notably, Bayesian optimization algorithms have been adapted the Hyperband

Reviewer: Typo / extra word here. "have been adapted the"

algorithm. For example, AutoML's [BOHB] uses TPE and Hyperband in tandem.  Even
better, they have an intelligent way of scaling to distributed systems given
Hyperband's parallel architecture[^scaling]<sup>,</sup>[^ray-bayesian] -- it's

> future to integrate this Bayesian sampling into Dask-ML.

Reviewer: missing a word here. "future work" I think.

Author: I've removed this whole paragraph on improvements to Bayesian sampling. As you correctly pointed out, the goal is to correct the false statements, not detail improvements or other algorithms.

[XGBoost]:https://xgboost.ai/
[LightGBM]:https://lightgbm.readthedocs.io/
[PyTorch]:https://pytorch.org/
[Keras]:https://keras.io/
[SciKeras]:https://github.com/adriangb/scikeras
[Skorch]:https://skorch.readthedocs.io/

By this measure, Dask-ML and Ray model selection have the same level of
framework support. Of course, Dask has tangential integration with LightGBM and
XGBoost through [dask_ml.xgboost][dmlxg] and [dask-lightgbm][dml-lg].

[^ray-pf]:From [Ray's README.md]: "If the estimator does not support `partial_fit`, a warning will be shown saying early stopping cannot be done and it will simply run the cross-validation on Ray's parallel back-end."

[dml-lg]:https://github.com/dask/dask-lightgbm
[dmlxg]:https://ml.dask.org/xgboost.html
[Ray's README.md]:https://github.com/ray-project/tune-sklearn/blob/31f228e21ef632a89a74947252d8ad5323cbd043/README.md

### Scale up

> [Ray's] Tune-sklearn leverages Ray Tune, a library for distributed
> hyperparameter tuning, to efficiently and transparently parallelize cross
> validation on multiple cores and even multiple machines.

*Dask-ML also supports distributed tuning (how could it not?). In addition,

> it also supports out-of-memory data.*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
it also supports larger-than-memory datasets.*
```

  that I've bootstrapped myself with a custom model.
* Dask-ML's `HyperbandSearchCV`. This is an early stopping technique for
  `RandomizedSearchCV`.
* Ray tune-sklearn's `TuneSearchCV`. This is a slightly different early
  stopping technique for `RandomizedSearchCV`.

Each of these will be configured to sample `n_params` parameters and to train
models no longer than `max_iter` "epochs" or passes through the data.  All of
these estimators will be set up as their respective documentation suggests, and
I choose to benchmark random searches instead of grid searches because random
searches produce better results.[^random-search]

[^random-search]:Because grid searches require estimating how important each parameter is; for more detail see "[Random Search for Hyperparameter Optimization][rsho]" by Bergstra and Bengio.

[rsho]:http://www.jmlr.org/papers/volume13/bergstra12a/bergstra12a.pdf

I'm most interested in how effective the early stopping is for Ray and Dask-ML.
The parameters/data aren't interesting for this comparison; all three methods
initialize models with random selection. So, I will measure the time taken to

> complete `search.fit(X, y)` for various searches. That means it the data and

Reviewer: typo: "it"

)

dask_search.fit(X_train, y_train)  # 1.79 minutes
ray_search.fit(X_train, y_train)  # 1.55 minutes
```

<img src="/images/2020-model-selection/n_workers=8.png" width="450px"
/>

[sts-dhc]:https://github.com/stsievert/dask-hyperband-comparison

Clearly, Ray and Dask-ML offer similar performance for 8 workers when compared
with Scikit-learn. Even relatively, Dask-ML is only 15% slower than Ray with 8
workers. Ray might perform better with more workers because they implement an
asychronous variant of Dask-ML's Hyperband; however, Dask-ML can scale up to 24
workers for a search in "[Better and faster hyperparameter optimization with
Dask][db-bf]." That's the number of GPUs on 4 nodes on the [Summit
supercomputer][summit]!

[summit]:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Summit_(supercomputer)#Design

The benchmark above ignores the fact that the Dask-ML implementation
prioritizes fitting high scoring models, which is especially relevant in the
serial context.[^priority] If there are 25 models to fit and only 5 slots to
run them in, Dask-ML selects the models that have the highest score. See
"[Better and faster hyperparameter optimization with Dask][db-bf]" for

> benchmarks.

Reviewer: Might be worth linking to Matt's benchmarking post, as a general comment on the difficulty of these kinds of shootouts.

[^priority]:Because priority is meaningless if there are an infinite number of workers.

## Conclusion

Dask-ML and Ray offer the same features for model selection: state-of-the-art
features with a Scikit-learn compatible API, and both implementations have
fairly wide support for different frameworks and rely on backends that can
scale to many machines.

The Ray implementation has provided motivation for further development,
specifically on the following items:

1. **Including a Bayesian sampling implementation to Dask-ML's Hyperband
   implementation** that's similar to BOHB's ([dask/dask-ml#697][697]).
2. **Improving the implementation of exploratory hyperparameter searches.** An
   initial implementation is in [dask/dask-ml#532][532], which should be
   benchmarked against Ray.
3. **Adding support for more libraries, including Keras**

>    ([dask/dask-ml#696][696], [dask/dask-ml#699][699]). We have already adding a

Reviewer: Typo here.

[rts-hb]:https://docs.ray.io/en/master/tune/api_docs/sklearn.html

### Framework support

*Dask-ML model selection supports libraries like Scikit-Learn, PyTorch, Keras, LightGBM and XGBoost.*

Ray's tune-sklearn supports these frameworks:

> tune-sklearn is used primarily for tuning
> Scikit-Learn models, but it also supports and provides examples for many
> other frameworks with Scikit-Learn wrappers such as Skorch (Pytorch),
> KerasClassifiers (Keras), and XGBoostClassifiers (XGBoost).

However, both Dask-ML and Ray have some qualifications. Certain libraries don't
offer an implementation of `partial_fit`,[^ray-pf] so not all of the modern
hyperparameter optimization techniques can be offered. That means Bayesian
sampling will have to be relied upon, which gets less and less relevant as the
number of workers grows. Here's a table comparing different libraries and their
support in Dask-ML's model selection and Ray's tune-sklearn:

| Model Library | Dask-ML support | Ray support | Dask-ML: early stopping? | Ray: early stopping? |
|:-----:|:-----:|:-----:|:-----:|:-----:|
| [Scikit-Learn] | ✔ | ✔ | ✔\* |✔\* |
| [PyTorch] (via [Skorch]) | ✔ | ✔ | ✔ |✔ |

> | [Keras] (via [SciKeras]) | ✔ |✔ | ✔\*\*| ✔\*\* |

Reviewer 3: Is Ray also working on this?

Author: No. But the work around https://github.com/adriangb/scikeras/issues/24 means that Ray can use it too. I've changed the footnote:

> ** Thanks to work by the Dask developers around [scikeras#24][1]

[1]:https://github.com/adriangb/scikeras/issues/24

[^ray-pf]:From [Ray's README.md]: "If the estimator does not support `partial_fit`, a warning will be shown saying early stopping cannot be done and it will simply run the cross-validation on Ray's parallel back-end."

[dml-lg]:https://github.com/dask/dask-lightgbm
[dmlxg]:https://ml.dask.org/xgboost.html
[Ray's README.md]:https://github.com/ray-project/tune-sklearn/blob/31f228e21ef632a89a74947252d8ad5323cbd043/README.md

### Scale up

*Dask-ML supports distributed tuning (how could it not?). In addition,
it also supports larger-than-memory data.*

> [Ray's] Tune-sklearn leverages Ray Tune, a library for distributed
> hyperparameter tuning, to efficiently and transparently parallelize cross
> validation on multiple cores and even multiple machines.

Naturally, Dask-ML also scales to multiple cores/machines because it relies on
Dask. Dask has wide support for [different deployment options][ddo] that span
from your personal machine to supercomputers. Dask will very likely work on top
of any computing system you have available, including Kubernetes, SLURM, YARN
and Hadoop clusters as well as your personal machine.

Dask-ML's model selection also scales to larger than memory datasets.

> <!-- TODO talk to Ray devs about this -->

Reviewer 3: Outstanding todo.

[ray-trainable]:https://medium.com/rapids-ai/30x-faster-hyperparameter-search-with-raytune-and-rapids-403013fbefc5

In addition, I have benchmarked Dask-ML's model selection module to see how the
time-to-solution is affected by the number of Dask workers in "[Better and
faster hyperparameter optimization with Dask][db-bf]." That is, how does the
time to reach a particular accuracy scale with the number of workers $P$? At
first, it'll scale like $1/P$ but with large number of workers the serial
portion will dictate time to solution according to [Amdahl's Law]. Briefly, I
found Dask-ML's `HyperbandSearchCV` speedup started to saturate around 24
workers for a particular search.

[^bohb-parallel]:In Section 4.2 of [their paper](http://proceedings.mlr.press/v80/falkner18a/falkner18a.pdf).

[db-bf]:https://blog.dask.org/2019/09/30/dask-hyperparam-opt

[Amdahl's Law]:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Amdahl%27s_law
[ddo]:https://docs.dask.org/en/latest/setup.html
[plg]:https://lightgbm.readthedocs.io/en/latest/Parallel-Learning-Guide.html

### Speed

*Both Dask-ML and Ray are much faster than Scikit-Learn.*

Ray's tune-sklearn runs some benchmarks in [the introduction][1] with the

> `GridSearchCV` class found Scikit-Learn and Dask-ML. A more fair benchmark

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`GridSearchCV` class found in Scikit-Learn and Dask-ML. A more fair benchmark
```

would be use Dask-ML's `HyperbandSearchCV` because it is almost the same as the
algorithm in Ray's tune-sklearn. To be specific, I'm interested in comparing
these methods:

* Scikit-Learn's `RandomizedSearchCV`. This is a popular implementation, one
  that I've bootstrapped myself with a custom model.
* Dask-ML's `HyperbandSearchCV`. This is an early stopping technique for
  `RandomizedSearchCV`.
* Ray tune-sklearn's `TuneSearchCV`. This is a slightly different early
  stopping technique than `HyperbandSearchCV`'s.

> Each of these will be configured to perform the same tasks, sample 100

Reviewer 3: I think this whole section should be in the past tense.

Author: Thanks; resolved

data. All of these estimators will be set up as their respective documentation
suggests;[^random-search] the complete setup is in [the
appendix](#appendix).

Each search will use 8 workers with a single cross validation split. I've also
setup the model so every `partial_fit` call processes 60,000 examples in 1.2
seconds. Here's how long each library takes to complete this search:

<img src="/images/2020-model-selection/n_workers=8.png" width="450px"
 />

Notably, we didn't improve the Dask-ML codebase for this benchmark, and ran the
code as it's been for the last year (though it's possible that other artifacts
from [biased benchmarks][bb] crept into this benchmark).

Clearly, Ray and Dask-ML offer similar performance for 8 workers when compared
with Scikit-Learn. To Ray's credit, their implementation is ~15% faster than
Dask-ML's with 8 workers. We suspect that this performance boost comes from the
fact that Ray implements an asynchronous variant of Hyperband. We should
investigate this difference between Dask and Ray, and how each balances the
tradeoffs (number FLOPs and time-to-solution). This will vary with the number

> of workers: the asynchronous variant of Hyperband is has no benefit if used

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
of workers: the asynchronous variant of Hyperband provides no benefit if used
```

author: <a href="https://stsievert.com">Scott Sievert</a> (University of Wisconsin–Madison)
tags: [machine-learning, dask-ml, dask, ray]
theme: twitter
---

{% include JB/setup %}

Hyperparameter optimization is the process of deducing model parameters that
can't be learned from data. This process is often time- and resource-consuming,
especially in the context of deep learning. A good description of this process
can be found at "[Tuning the hyper-parameters of an estimator][tuning]," and
the issues that arise are concisely summarized in Dask-ML's documentation of
"[Hyper Parameter Searches]."

[Hyper Parameter Searches]:https://ml.dask.org/hyper-parameter-search.html

There's a host of libraries and frameworks out there to address this problem.
[Scikit-Learn's module][skl-ms] has been mirrored [in Dask-ML][dml-ms] and
[auto-sklearn], both of which offer advanced hyperparameter optimization
techniques. Other implementations that don't follow the Scikit-Learn interface
include [Ray Tune], [AutoML] and [Optuna].

[AutoML]:https://www.automl.org/
[auto-sklearn]:https://automl.github.io/auto-sklearn/master/

> [Ray] recently provided a wrapper to [Ray Tune] that mirrors the Scikit-Learn
> API. [The introduction][1] of this library states the following:
> 
> [Ray]:https://docs.ray.io
> [Ray Tune]:https://docs.ray.io/en/master/tune.html

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
[Ray] recently provided a wrapper to [Ray Tune] that mirrors [the Scikit-Learn API]. 
[The introduction][1] of this library states the following:

[Ray]:https://docs.ray.io
[Ray Tune]:https://docs.ray.io/en/master/tune.html
[the Scikit-Learn API]: https://github.com/ray-project/tune-sklearn
```

Just so that folks can see the code!
